DataDeck: Steam Market Analytics System
Overview

DataDeck is a full-stack data analytics project that demonstrates the end-to-end process of working with real-world data.
This project analyzes Steam’s game market by cleaning raw Kaggle datasets, storing them in a relational database, and visualizing trends through an interactive Tableau dashboard.

The goal of DataDeck is to highlight practical skills in data cleaning, SQL integration, and business intelligence dashboard design using modern analytical tools.

Objectives

Transform raw Kaggle datasets into a structured database.

Build a reproducible ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) pipeline using Python and SQLite.

Analyze game trends such as genre distribution, developer activity, and pricing behavior.

Visualize findings through an interactive Tableau dashboard.

Data Source

The raw datasets used in this project are sourced from Kaggle and are not included in this repository due to GitHub’s file size limitations.

You can download them directly from:

Steam Games Dataset — Nik Davis

Steam Reviews Dataset — Andrew MVD

After downloading, place the files in:

data/raw/


and run:

python src/clean_data.py
python src/load_to_sql.py


This will prepare the cleaned dataset and local database.

Project Structure
datadeck-steam-analytics/
│
├── data/
│   ├── raw/              # Kaggle datasets (ignored in Git)
│   ├── cleaned/          # Processed CSV files for analysis
│   └── datadeck.db       # SQLite database
│
├── notebooks/
│   └── analysis.ipynb    # SQL queries and data visualization in Python
│
├── src/
│   ├── clean_data.py     # Data cleaning and preprocessing
│   └── load_to_sql.py    # Load cleaned data into SQLite
│
├── tableau/
│   └── dashboard_links.txt
│
├── visuals/
│   └── dashboard_preview.png
│
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md

Technologies Used

Python: Data cleaning, preprocessing, and ETL

Libraries: Pandas, Matplotlib, SQLite3

SQLite: Local relational database for structured storage

Tableau Public: Interactive dashboard design and publication

Jupyter Notebook: Exploratory data analysis and visualization

Methodology

Data Cleaning (Python):
The raw Steam dataset was filtered to retain relevant columns, remove missing values, and standardize formats.

Database Creation (SQLite):
Cleaned data was loaded into a SQLite database for efficient querying and reproducibility.

Exploratory Data Analysis (Python):
SQL queries were used to extract key insights about genres, developers, and pricing.
Matplotlib visualizations were used to validate patterns before moving into Tableau.

Dashboard Development (Tableau):
The final analysis was visualized using Tableau Public, featuring three key dashboards:

Steam Overview

Developer Insights

Ratings and Pricing Relationships

Interactive Dashboard

You can explore the live dashboard on Tableau Public here:
View DataDeck: Steam Market Analytics System

Dashboards Included

Steam Overview — Top genres by total game price and platform distribution.

Developer Insights — Leading developers by game count and genre contribution.

Ratings and Pricing — Visualizing the relationship between price and positive ratings.

Key Insights

Action and Indie genres account for the majority of Steam’s total market value.

A small subset of developers produce the largest number of games.

Game price and positive ratings show only a weak correlation, suggesting pricing does not strongly predict user sentiment.

How to Reproduce

Clone the repository:

git clone https://github.com/yourusername/datadeck-steam-analytics.git
cd datadeck-steam-analytics


Create a virtual environment and install dependencies:

python -m venv venv
venv\Scripts\activate
pip install -r requirements.txt


Add raw data to data/raw/ and run the ETL pipeline:

python src/clean_data.py
python src/load_to_sql.py


Launch Jupyter Notebook for local analysis:

jupyter notebook

Results and Deliverables

Cleaned and normalized Steam dataset.

SQLite database for efficient querying.

Jupyter notebook demonstrating SQL analysis and Python visualizations.

Published Tableau dashboard accessible via Tableau Public.
